% Linux - Scheduling
% Rémi Audebert
% 2015-06-19

# Scheduling

### Introduction

- Linux is a time sharing OS.
- Multiple processes are executed "simultaneously".
- This is achieved by switching from one process to another in a very short
  time frame.
- Problems:

    - When to switch?
    - Which is the next process?

### Scheduling needs

- Fast process response time
- Good throughput for background jobs
- Avoid process starvation
- Respect of the processes priorities

### Time sharing

- A CPU can only run one process at a given instant.
- CPU time is divided into time slices, or *quanta*.
- If a currently running process is not terminated when its *quantum* expires,
  a process switch may take place.
- Time sharing relies on timer interrupts and is transparent to processes.

### Scheduling policy

- Processes are ranked and sorted by their priorities and current activity.
- Processes ranks are dynamic, the scheduler keeps tracks of what processes are
  doing and adjust their priorities.
- Two classes of processes:

    - I/O-bound: spend must time waiting for devices
    - CPU-bound: require only CPU time

### Linux schedulers history

- O(1)
- Rotating Staircase Deadline
- Completely Fair Scheduler (CFS), introduced in 2.6.23, default
- Brain Fuck Scheduler (BFS), simpler alternative to CFS

### Scheduler classes

Different processes can have different scheduler classes:

- `SCHED_NORMAL`: CFS
- `SCHED_FIFO`: First-in-first-out
- `SCHED_RR`: Realtime round-robin
- `SCHED_DEADLINE`: Earliest deadline first

Each scheduling class will be executed one after the other, in their priority
order.

<!---
Earliest deadline first (EDF) or least time to go is a dynamic scheduling
algorithm used in real-time operating systems to place processes in a priority
queue. Whenever a scheduling event occurs (task finishes, new task released,
etc.) the queue will be searched for the process closest to its deadline. This
process is the next to be scheduled for execution.
-->

### Realtime scheduling

- The standard Linux kernel only meets soft real-time requirements.
- No guarantees for hard timing deadlines.
- The `-rt` patchset aims to provide a 

### Periodic ticks

- Each running CPU is interrupted `HZ` time each second by the periodic timer.
  `HZ` value is between 100 and 1000. See `zgrep CONFIG_HZ /proc/config.gz`.
- Each tick, Linux may perform:

    - Time keeping
    - Scheduling
    - Process statistics (`getrusage()`)
    - Deferred free (RCU, lockless operations)
    - Deferred processing (tasklets, work queues)
    - OS maintenance

### A tickless kernel

- Problems with ticking systems:

    - Periodic ticking is a performance issue.
    - High power usage.

- Solutions:

    - `CONFIG_NO_HZ_IDLE`: ticking is disabled when the CPU is idle (default
      for most distributions)
    - `CONFIG_NO_HZ_FULL`: no ticking at all (except for boot CPU)

<!---
http://lwn.net/Articles/549580/
https://events.linuxfoundation.org/sites/events/files/slides/LinuxCon%20-%20TicklessKernel_revc.pdf
-->

### Syscalls related to scheduling

- `nice()`: Change the static priority of a process
- `getpriority()`, `setpriority()`: get/set nice value of a process, process group or user
- `sched_yield()`: Relinquish the processor voluntarily without blocking

# Timers

### 

### References

- https://www.cs.columbia.edu/~smb/classes/s06-4118/l13.pdf
- https://events.linuxfoundation.org/sites/events/files/slides/LinuxCon%20-%20TicklessKernel_revc.pdf
- http://criticalblue.com/news/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/linux_scheduler_notes_final.pdf

<!---
vim: spl=en spell:
-->
