% Linux - File systems
% Rémi Audebert - Pierre Surply
% 2015-06-04

# Introduction

### File systems

- Located in the `fs/` directory of the Linux sources.
- Can be built-in or loaded as modules.
- Provide a wide range of functionality:

    - Journals
    - Compression
    - Snapshots
    - Redundancy

- Two general purposes of file system:

    - File storage, e.g., ext4, zfs or btrfs.
    - Pseudo file systems, e.g., procfs, sysfs or kdbusfs

### The VFS

- A common interface to all the file systems.
- A hierarchy of directories, starting with `/`.
- Each Linux distribution chooses how to organize it.

    - A pretty outdated description can be read in `hier(7)`.
    - Systemd's modernized version is described in `file-hierarchy(7)`.

- Userspace interacts with the VFS using a set of syscalls: `open(2)`,
  `creat(2)`, `unlink(2)`, etc.

### Changing `/`

- `chroot(2)` can be used to change the root of the filesystem hierarchy of the
  current process. This is the syscall used by `chroot(1)` and
  `switch_root(8)`.

#### Namespaces

- A process can get a completely different set of mount points, this is called
  changing of mount namespace.
- The list of all filesystems currently mounted can be seen in
  `/proc/[pid]/mounts`.
- More namespaces exist: `PID`, `USER`, `NET`, `IPC` and `UTS`.
- For more information, see `namespaces(7)`

### Path resolution

- What happens when you call `open(my_path, my_options)`?
- Is it absolute (starting with a `/`) or relative? This defines the starting
  lookup directory.

### Mounts

- The `mount(1)` utility can be used to display the list of mountpoints in your
  current namespace.
- A mount is triplet of:

    - Filesystem type (may be none)

- Special mount type: the `bind` mount that links a directory to another.

# Anatomy of the VFS

### `struct file`

### Dirent

### Inodes

### Caches

- Multiple caches help avoiding immediate access to the underlying hardware,
  and other internal data structures.
- Inode caches

# Adding a file system in Linux

### Why creating a new file system?

- Adding entries to `/proc` is discouraged.
- A single misc device may not be enough for what you what to do.
- Adding "new syscalls" using `ioctl(2)` is also discouraged.

### FUSE: Filesystem in Userspace

- A filesystem in which data and metadata are provided by an ordinary userspace
  process.The filesystem can be accessed normally through the kernel interface.
- It consists of a kernel module (`fuse.ko`), a userspace library
  (`libfuse.so`) and mount utilities (`fusemount`, `mount.fuse`).
- Binding are available for other languages, eg. python.
- Projects using FUSE:

    - gdrivefs (Google Drive)
    - rar2fs (rar archives)
    - encfs (encrypted files)

- http://fuse.sourceforge.net/

### CUSE: Character device in Userspace

- Based on the fuse kernel code (`fs/fuse/cuse.c`).
- Userland can create 

<!---
vim: spl=en spell:
-->
